---
layout: post
author: nslavov
title: "Idealism and realism in academia"
date:   2022-08-03
description: Academia is a meeting place of lofty ideas and prosaic reality.
---



Academia is a meeting place of lofty ideas and prosaic reality. Naturally, this meeting creates tension. The lofty ideas create the expectation that academia should do much better. Better than the grabby reality of pursuing profits, better than the mercenary world of business. These high expectations can set us up for disappointment and sometimes even cynicism. Yet, I think we can choose a better response.


I grew up idealistic. It was more than youthful idealism: Two formative experiences from my life provided empirical evidence for my idealism.


The first experience was my participation in scientific Olympiads, physics, biology and chemistry. These competitions seemed perfectly fair. At least I never had a reason to suspect otherwise. As a student from a remote province of a remote country, I was allowed to win while competing with students from top schools, some of whom taking lessons from the professors organizing the national and international Olympiads. My success in these Olympiads led to my second formative experience providing evidence for my idealism: MIT paid my undergraduate tuition and fellowship. The fellowship seemed exceedingly generous to me at the time since my expenses were minimal, mostly oatmeal, beans, and veggies bought in bulk from Hey Market. This gift from MIT solidified my perception of a meritocratic system. Furthermore, it provided compelling empirical evidence for the possibility to pursue education and research without growing up in a wealthy environment.


Given these experiences, my idealism was sky high when I started my PhD research at Princeton University. However, I also started encountering examples that were incongruous with my ideals of a perfectly fair and meritocratic world. Reconciling my perceptions and experiences with my idealistic views was challenging. Sometimes I misunderstood how the system works, and sometimes I publicly shared my evolving views and thoughts. This journey led me to a framework that reconciled the tension -- at least for me -- and shaped an actionable attitude.


A key to this reconciliation is defining optimal outcomes within realistic constraints. For example, evaluating original cutting-edge research is fundamentally different from grading a few hundred solutions to the same well understood scientific problems. This means that the level of meritocracy achievable at the International Scientific Olympiads (my formative youthful experience) is fundamentally higher than the level of meritocracy achievable in cutting-edge research environments. Strong papers will be rejected even by well-intentioned and competent editors and reviewers. It is an intrinsic aspect of exploring the frontiers of human knowledge.


Of course the reality is much worse than the optimal outcomes within realistic constraints. Sometimes, people are not competent or not well intentioned. That is awful, and we should seek to minimize its impact. For me, that means not overgeneralizing and overreacting. When the project that has consumed most of your waking hours for the last few years is unfairly evaluated, the world might seem like a terrible place, falling apart. It's not that simple. The world is a very complex place with many facets: It is a highly imperfect place that you can make better. Yes, the best response for me is to realize how much lies within my control and to focus on it.

Academia is not an ideal place, but we should seize its lofty ideals and move it closer to them!    
